Yeah, but we're not there yet.
So we were just talking about... And you could have talked louder, I think.
Alright.
Please.
You said alright, and that's barely.
Okay, well, so we were just talking about Aslan, right?
And where you first heard about that, or where that kind of first entered your consciousness.
Um... So...
I want to say that that came out of the... I want to say it came out of Colorado.
What's his name?
Corky Gonzalez.
I don't even know if he mentions the Aslan in his epic I Am Joaquin.
He does?
Oh, I don't know.
I don't know.
But if he does, then that's...
That's probably where it came from.
That would be where it came from.
I know it came from that because he wrote that poem, and the Teatro Campesino, Luis, made it into a little movie, that that was, what's the word, cathartic?
It was like, fuck yeah, we shall endure.
In other words, it's not just a simple...
group of people complain about how they were treated over here in Colorado or New Mexico, but rather that we're all a part of something bigger.
And that poem, Corky, they were the ones fomenting, promoting propaganda of Aslan.
And then Alurista and the student, the student proclamation.
The plan.
Plan de Aslan.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I thought you were talking about the Santa Barbara.
No, not the Santa Barbara.
And so those were the beginnings of that, and then the rest is what we all... So you think that... Okay, so... Tijerina was not talking about Aslan.
Right.
The Ras Unida Party was not talking about Aslan.
Yeah.
Corky was talking about Aslan.
The Teatro was talking about Aslan.
Mm-hmm.
So that's what Chavez wasn't talking about.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, okay, so.
Oh, just to give you a. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, but I just want to kind of be clear on.
So you think that you, that it was Corky's poem that was then kind of like adopted by the teatro and that that's how you first encountered that concept.
Yeah, through the teatro.
Yeah.
So, like, when you were 18, 19 years old.
And the other one for me would be Agustin Lira.
Yeah, Agustin Lira, folk singer with a teatro.
Yeah.
Who, one of his favorite songs I always liked was... What the hell was the name of it?
Shit, man.
I know I'm getting old now.
Brown-eyed children of the sun?
No.
What songs did he write?
That he spent years... The hell's the name?
Que hubo raza.
Oh, uh-huh.
Bueno pues que hubo y como les va que lindo día para cantar noticias.
Anyway, so in one little short song, he gives the issue in New Mexico, Colorado, we're never going to become gringos, you know, all of that.
So that had a definite impact.
And Agustin was part of the Teatro Campesino?
Yeah.
Him and Luis are the ones that started the Teatro Campesino with the farm workers.
Okay, so then I think this is probably a good transition into the mestizaje stuff because that comes up pretty prominently in... Well, in the poem, I am Joaquin, he alludes to the mestizaje in the sense that in his... I guess in his view at the time, he...
He saw us as, as he probably read the shit about and all of that because he's talking about that we're, we're, he's the one that came out with that triple face.
Yeah.
Spaniard.
I thought that was Alorista.
No.
Oh, okay.
Spaniard, Indian, and Chicano.
Yeah.
So it, it came out of Denver.
promoted it like that so how did you okay so that i think that's a good maybe characterization of how quirky gonzalez uh introduced it or understood it did you ever so would you say that maybe that was your first encounter with that idea of messy for me
I want to say yes, but for some doggone reason in the back of my head, I keep thinking that somewhere in the Mexican community, the idea that we were half Indian and half Spanish was there in general, which is probably how quirky
Kind of picked that up or something.
Yeah.
Unless he read something about Miss Isake somewhere.
But just the idea of being mixed, you know, it's like here in the United States, you know, there isn't any purity of ethnicity.
So they're mixed.
Yeah.
So they saw themselves as mixed.
And after 500 years of the Spaniards and French and whoever the hell else in Mexico,
The simplistic view is to say, oh, well, I'm half Indian and half Mexican or Spanish.
Did you ever at any point in your time, like, I'm sure you have given the things that you have already talked about on, like, the evolution of your thought.
Yeah.
Was there any point in time where you believed that you were mixed, like that, mestizaje kind?
Like, did you identify with that?
I never identified with the mestizaje.
And I was always suspect of the actual Spanish in me that might be there.
And I've never been, and I've never, and that's only because of stories in the familia about a Spanish root or connection or whatever you want to call it.
But the strongest connection for me has always been our native element.
And as a result of that, I remember I developed a teatro exercise, and I developed that at Santa Clara University where I was mainly talking with gringos, gringo students that had no, that I didn't just consider a class or whatever.
So the exercise was that I would tell them that the room or classroom was a map of the United States.
You did that with us at this map conference.
Oh, good.
So I used that exercise to have them have a transitional history of
how they came to be where they are, that they just didn't.
They're not just from here.
And because they were mostly gringos in my class there, and I had a four or five raza that were there, the five raza, let's say the five raza and the 50 white students would all end up standing up against the walls because they weren't anywhere rooted in the United States boundaries.
And the only ones left were, let's say three of the five Raza students, three of them were born or ended up with roots in Mexico, some state in Mexico.
One, maybe two, like Texas or New Mexico.
And so that then would allow me to give an explanation of how we see our,
ancestral roots being from here and not from Asia or Germany or whatever.
So what am I answering?
The thing about mestizo?
Yeah, we were talking about mestizo and whether or not you felt like you at any point in your life identified as mestizo.
I don't think I ever identified as mestizo.
I always identified as
Tejano and then Mexicano, Northern Mexicano.
Cause I wasn't like from where your mom is from Zacatecas or Northern, Northern States and Tamaulipas, that whole area of Bravo.
And so when I identify with that, then
I always looked at it from a maternal perspective, not like where my father's grandfathers were, but the grandmas, the mom, the grandma, great grandma, et cetera.
And so that's how I made the connection to that we're, no matter whose blood came into the family line, we're still
Native.
So I never saw myself as a mestizo like that.
Well, I guess, I mean, so that seems like maybe like a conscious kind of choice.
Yeah.
But would you maybe be aware if you like subconsciously thought about it or?
No, I mean, the only time I ever thought about mestizo was that, hey, that's an interesting symbol.
You know, artistically or graphically because it, it automatically tells you, oh, this is a combination of cultures.
Um, but the more I discovered my cultural native stuff, you know, I've been calling, uh,
and, you know, all kinds of words that I used growing up that weren't Mexican.
I mean, Spanish.
They were Mexican.
They were Nahuatl or whatever.
So it was a realization of the nativeness that's in us that we're just not even aware of.
Okay.
And then I met this guy with a teatro who's Israeli.
who came with Peter Brook and they were with us for eight weeks.
And this guy was, I don't know what the title or his focus was, but it had to do with physiology, the body.
And he, what the hell did he tell me?
What I learned from him was that he was saying that
just by looking at a person, you can tell.
Are you talking about the epidemiology?
What's epidemiology?
The, who was the guy you mentioned?
Brooks?
No, that was the guy who brought him, but his name was, uh, shit.
I knew his name.
His name was, I think epidemiology is like the, uh, actually, I don't know.
He became a real, uh, he's a real famous guy.
And his name will come to me at some point.
But anyway, what he was doing is, you know how there's anthropologists and others who, by your skull formation or your teeth, they can tell.
Yeah.
Feldenkrais.
That's his last name.
What the hell was his first name?
Feldenkrais, the Feldenkrais method.
If you just put that, it'll come out.
Anyway, he was in San Juan and he worked with us.
But what he was saying is that human beings carry with them from generation to generation to generation to generation.
In other words, you don't lose this.
The body learns behavior and actions
from your oldest ancestor.
So what he was saying is he can look at a human being and the way they stand, their posture, the way they walk, all of that, and he can determine character, all kinds of different things about that.
So anyway, he was there because he was trying to teach us about how to control the body,
how to evolve it so that it's more balanced.
So for example, like when you walk or stand with people, you always try to make yourself shorter.
Do you know that?
Me?
Yeah.
Personal?
Personal.
Oh, no, I know.
You're always haunching, always doing that.
And versus other people who stand taller or whatever.
So anyway, why am I telling you all this?
Just another...
connection to, to why are we, or thinking in terms of consciousness, why are we the way we are?
Why do we do what we do?
Why are we, what are the character, what are the positive and the negative characteristics of raza and what significance is in your
being because you're from Zacatecas or you're from Tamaulipas or you know from different areas so those were things that were interesting to me and so I always looked at that too and and all of that you know when you think about so what it led me to understand or to look seek out and stuff is why are we communal
Why are we more communal as a lifestyle, as a way of being than gringos who are more selfish, more me first, you know, all of that stuff.
Because those are the things that we need to understand about our way of being so that we can be it rather than, but like native people to show respect, they don't look
you in the eye they don't they don't do this shit gringos do this shit and if you don't do that with a gringo they think you're less you have a problem whereas a native person he's being he or she's being respectful see what i'm saying so all that kind of stuff yeah
I had an interest in.
And so when I'd meet people, when I was working with people that weren't part of my family and I didn't know they weren't educated or they were educated, it didn't matter what their education was, that there was a way for me to connect with them in order to get a story out or a teatro acto or whatever, because that's how I
built unity for action.
Okay.
Does that make any sense to you?
Yeah.
Okay.
So it involves that as well.
And then there's a whole spiritual side too.
And that's been an involvement and development as well.
I mean, the development and involvement of that as a Chicano is that for me, I had to come to the point where I'm saying,
I'm not Catholic.
Catholic is the ship that's been placed on me.
La Virgen de Guadalupe is not La Virgen de Guadalupe.
It's Mother Earth.
It's a symbol no different than Guadalquia, the two-headed serpent.
And so what does that mean?
How do I explain that?
Do I have to explain it?
No.
So when I went into that piece of Chicanismo,
Then it becomes a whole other thing because you're really stepping on the oppressive colonial institutionalization of Christianity, Catholic Church on Native people.
I mean, you still got your teacher, Gerardo and all these other people.
They're so, you know, go to the church.
yeah um well let's get back to the mestizaje stuff so um what were we just saying okay so you mentioned that so you you've never felt any kind of connection to well or at least to the idea that it is some kind of fusion of two cultures or how did you say it you said something about like a
The image, the symbol.
Yeah, I know, but you described it as a, like, culture clash, or not a culture clash, but like a combination or combining of cultures, something like that.
Yeah.
But anyways.
It was another way of justifying that you weren't Spanish and you weren't Native, you were a combination of
Yeah.
Okay, so... And then you had mentioned that, like, when you saw the picture or the image that you thought, oh, okay, that's interesting, or that you had said that you were, like, suspect of it or suspicious of it.
Mm-hmm.
So I was wondering if you could tell me a little bit more, like, what was it that was... Like, why did it raise your suspicion?
Well, because...
Because, well, interestingly, I connect this to it now, but I didn't then, is that when I was about, when I was in training for my first communion, sitting in a Catholic church in the Barrio in McAllen, that there was an image of Our Lady of Guadalupe, a statue, and a statue of Mary on the other side.
And I asked the
the dumb question to the nurse, to the nun.
She might as well be a nurse.
To the nun, I said, how come there's two Marys?
Why is there one that's brown and one that's blue-eyed and white?
And her response was, don't be asking stupid questions.
Give me your hand.
And she hit me on my hand with a ruler.
And I never forgot that since then because of
the pain I felt on it and not understanding what the hell did I say or do.
Yeah.
And then later when I'm with a teatro in San Juan Batista and we're talking about doing a play that somebody sent us that was written by the Franciscans.
Mm-hmm.
the Espanoles, talking about the appearances, Las Cuatro Apariciones de la Virgen de Guadalupe.
And so we thought, duh, hey, let's do this play because Cesar Chavez marches with the Virgen de Guadalupe.
So he's using the cultural icons and images of our ancestors to create unity
for labor organizing yeah so let's do a play about la virgen because our community is guadalupano part of it in in this concept and zapata carried her image in the in his hats and stuff and right so we're trying to make a connection of political action spiritual action and mexicanism with all of that and trying to
to grasp it for a Chicano view of it.
So we decided to do just the play as written by the priest.
Luis wasn't even around.
He didn't direct it or anything.
It was me and Negro, Arturo Gomez, who lives in San Juan.
And it was only four characters.
Juan Diego, the bishop, the virgin, and the lowly priest.
Wow.
So it was very economical in that sense.
So what happened with that is that while setting up to do that, I still got a goddamn book that I bought back then at a
Mexican grocery store, you know, those little periodicals, which I read, and that was like my first background of the whole thing, right?
And I began to question, you know, it's like, wait a minute.
She appeared at the Temple of Do Not Seeing and da-da-da.
that moment began to evolve my whole undoing of the Catholic line.
Okay.
And all of that.
But in the process, it also connected me to a different piece, which had to do with faith based characteristic of native people.
We don't have to necessarily see something to believe it.
It's an internal sense.
It's a,
You know, it's a feeling.
And I definitely had those feelings.
I didn't know where they were from, but I knew I had them.
But I immediately connected it to that fucking... Sister nun who hit me because I asked the question.
And then I reviewed that question and I was still like, well, wait a minute.
So how...
So after all of these years, since 1971, which is when we did it, to now, I have evolved that question into she's Mother Earth.
She's a representation of everything that Mother Earth represents, not just to Native people in Mexico, but Native people anywhere in the continent, okay?
Mm-hmm.
wait so do you think that the do you think that the image of Guadalupe is like do you think it was something that was fabricated by the Catholic Church or something that happened and was then used by the Catholic Church
Something happened, something took place, and the Catholic Church has been exploiting it, appropriating it ever since.
So as a Chicano who's evolved this whole story and all that, my stand right now is give back our artifacts.
No different than the Native people who are, hey, that's our burial ground.
Anything you find there is part of our ancestors.
That's a part of our ancestors.
Why?
Because Juan Diego, a Native person,
took care of it for the last remaining 50 years of his life, or whatever it was.
And there's a location, and there's a factual element, the pilma.
So that belongs to the native people of Mexico.
It doesn't belong to the church, the pope, or any of that crap.
That's being Chicano, to have those kind of demands.
So do you think that, uh, I mean, so to kind of bring it back to the messy Sahih issue, do you think that the, cause we're kind of talking about like how the Catholic church most likely appropriated that image, um, that
that that was part of, like, the Mestizah project to say, like, oh, look, she looks like you, but she's Catholic, or she's Christian, or something like that, right?
She's married.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, it's interesting, you know, the paper that I did about Sess of Chavez and stuff, I read that the Catholic Church did not fully integrate
The Virgen until like 200 years later.
Yeah.
Just like the... Yeah.
Because... See, the whole cult of Guadalupe is people of faith.
It was never the church promoting it.
Yeah.
And the...
behavior of the catholic church has always been like that in other parts of the world they they go into a country and they eliminate everything that's stated in that country whether it's ireland or england or whatever germany and what they can't eradicate because it's such a strong faith based
belief among the locals, then they say, okay, well, this is the same day of your person.
And then they appropriate it.
It's through appropriation.
Dia de los puertos, All Saints Day, you know, just goes on and on and on.
So what I'm saying is if you connect Tepeyac as property, as a place, a safer place,
It doesn't belong to the Catholic Church.
It doesn't belong to the Pope.
It should be a demand of Native people to, what do you call it, to take it over?
Reclaim it.
Yeah, exactly.
That, to me, is the heart of Chicanismo.
It's not getting a degree in biology or any of that other crap.
Yeah.
What do you, like, moving into the present, and I think you kind of touched upon this, but I think this will be my last kind of question.
But how do you, do you see mestizaje ideas today?
Are you familiar with, like, things that you might attribute to that
messy side that idea of you know these two separate things becoming one no no I don't think so because what what I see is like let's just say in my lifetime in 68 years I've seen and let's say not even 68 years let's say 50 something or
60 years no 50 something when I first came to California California was more population wise and all that was more California Lhasa sons grandsons of Mexicans okay first
First, what do you call it?
First generation.
Now it's more Mexican.
In other words, the Rocios and Macarios are the minority in terms of our community.
They're more Mexican.
There's more Rosas in the community because they've come into the community, but they're less conscious because they come with all the oppression and stuff that they left in Mexico.
So you find yourself, you, your brother, not Matias, because Matias is more, he can, what do they call it?
Navigate.
He can navigate through that stuff.
Just like I could navigate.
I could navigate through the English, the Spanish, the Mexican, the whatever, and I still can.
You guys are less able to do that.
because there's more of that population.
So they're not looking at themselves as Mestizos.
They see themselves as Mexican, this and that, they're regional.
But they are continuing to discover their native root.
And they're gonna continue to do that until the rebellion
Takes over.
Cultural rebellion or physical rebellion.
But it's going to be, it's not going to be, it'll only become military operation if somebody like Trump attacks Mexico.
Then they'll come and get us, all of us, because they won't be able to tell the difference.
Wait a minute, I got a nopal on my part now.
A nopal.
Kill you first?
Yeah, well, that's identity.
It's are you Mexican or not?
And so Chicanismo has a responsibility here because when Mexicans come here and make a connection with Chicanos, there's two responses that take place.
One is, these are the motherfuckers that are now oppressing us because they've taken the role of the gringo.
They are the gringos.
The Mexicans are saying that about the Chicanos?
Yeah.
Somebody like Macario, if they all work for him, he's like, hey, I'm the boss.
Versus that there's a connection there.
Which brings me to my latest
evolvement of chicarismo which is saying to myself well now that i'm old and getting older it's about it's about somehow creating a way to so i see that it's still as important now than ever to continue to evolve the chicarismo perspective of
of the Somos Uno, we're one, okay?
And that those who have strayed away from the oneness are a part of, they can either become the sellouts, the traitors, the killers, the oppressors, the colonizers, da-da-da-da-da, versus those who are going to become closer to their root.
And you see that happening right now all over.
So, but do you see that as a... I see that as a natural process that the oppressive government is going to continue to use.
That's why they want to get you in the army.
They want to get you into this and that.
Because when something really does happen, they're going to send your cousins after you.
Yeah.
And that's no different than what happened to the, let's say the Sioux, where they were put in reservations and then they hired the warriors to be the soldados.
And then ultimately the ones who killed like crazy whores and some of the others.
It's your own people.
So do you think that the, like, do you see this as a consequence of that kind of idea of mestizaje that
because there's this idea that we're mixed, that we can then somehow be part of both worlds, both American and... Mestizaje is... And this is the other thing I've been contemplating.
Mestizaje is the expression or the backdrop of selling out.
Becoming a vendido.
Being a vendido.
Existing is a vendido.
So how do you make that connection?
Or what do you mean by that?
I mean, I think I know what you mean by that.
What do you think I mean by that?
Tell me that for a second.
Well, I think what you're saying is that when you have kind of like this background or backdrop, as you called it,
of mestizaje that gives you some kind of uh like a path to move between those two cultures those two ideas whatever they might be right and so yes if one of those cultures like going back to that story about that hopi man right and how they were saying that look the way that you you conquer
or reclaim this stuff is by not becoming American, right?
Or not adopting American values.
Right.
And so mestizaje gives you some kind of... Permission.
Permission, or it opens a door that says, well, but that is part of your background, so it's okay for you to do that.
Yeah, yeah.
Is that a good way of it?
Yeah, but I think I would... Did you not think of that?
Yeah, but...
but additionally that that it it releases the person or the individual from being responsible true to themselves yeah taking responsibility for themselves and i've always had that
thrown back at me when I've asked an individual or a group or an organization to be true to the community.
In other words, think of what's in the best interest of the community, not you.
And their response is, well, if I don't take it, somebody else is going to take it.
You know, it's a self-opportunist thinking.
Vendido.
And...
I saw somewhere on Facebook that they were asking, somebody was asking, some university mecha grouper was inviting Luis to go and speak to them about this whole issue of... The mecha stuff?
The mecha stuff.
And you're thinking that's the wrong person to ask.
And I'm thinking, you see, this is how ignorant most of the community is about what Luis Valdez represents.
They see him as a... Someone who made it.
Yeah.
I was going to say a celebrity.
Mm-hmm.
And then because of his connection to the farm workers and labor movement, that he somehow has a, he has the qualifications to continue to be authentic.
And they don't in any moment in the history from then to now look at his life and say,
Oh, shit.
In 1976, he wrote a play called Zoot Suit, where it's now an American play, not a Chicano play.
It's an American play.
Everything now is America.
In other words, he's moved away from Chicano.
He's promoting American.
And it's all been...
you know, that.
So how in the hell are you going to get this guy who gave up his Chicano identity for an American identity in order to get the applause and the recognition from... But because he has that connection, that root connection to the farm workers, da-da-da-da, it blinds them
to an involvement.
So that's, so why do I have that view?
I have that view because I've lived it.
I've stood up against it, two.
And three, it again gets back to the idea, well, why does the Raza Historical Society of San Jose invite Blanca Alvarado and these other yahoos to be the spokes panel for chicanismo?
Fuck them.
Yeah, I think about that, like, when I think about, like, Dolores Huerta, right?
Like, I think she does that, too.
She trades on that actual work that she did.
And I think that's kind of what you're saying, too, about Luis, is that it's not to say that, like, they never were fully invested in that moment in time, but that they have changed.
Something is...
Well, yeah, but I mean, and that's fine to say, but that they like you have evolved.
You went off a certain way.
They went off this way.
You're saying that path was the sellout way.
That's fine.
But that there has been a change.
Right.
But that people today fail to.
Look at, contextualize it, right?
And say, like, okay, they were doing this, but then in this time period, they were doing this other stuff, and then this happened, and then this other stuff happened, right?
And I think about that, like, with Dolores Huerta, especially, like, you know, as she becomes more and more this, like, spokesperson for feminism and, like, white women feminism.
Yeah.
And, you know, the Democratic Party and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, and so I think, I mean, I don't know.
I think I want to go back to kind of like this point or if you have anything more you want to say about how you see Mestizaje as being kind of this blueprint to take that path forward.
towards vendidos or vendidoism yeah I would say yes and because it's here's how I I don't know if it's justified but this is the perspective that
that helps me identify what's true.
And I learned this from those Native people in upstate New York, the St.
Regis Retreat.
One of the guys was saying that Native reality or philosophy is that you can't be one or the other
You can't be mestizo.
You can't be one or the other.
You have to make a choice.
And the reason that you have to make a choice is because the story that, or the philosophy that they follow is that when you're on the road, on the river of life, you cannot travel down that river of life with one leg in one canoe.
and the other lake on another canoe.
It can't be, you know, it can go either way.
Because somewhere in that river of life, you're going to come to the rapids.
And when you come to the rapids, you're going in.
It's just as simple as that.
You have to be, you have to make one choice.
And those who are like that are going to,
come apart it doesn't last so this reminds me of uh this uh it has to do with like nepanla right okay and somebody was describing it as like you're walking on kind of a like a you know like the top of a mountain or something um
And that Nepantla kind of represents like trying to stay balanced on that very tip, right?
Because if you go too much this way, you're going to fall in that.
If you go too much this way, you're going to fall on the other side.
But that it's this kind of like delicate balancing between falling on either side or instability, right?
Even though it is surrounded by instability.
So I'm wondering if you see any kind of like connection between that and... To me, that concept of the peak and the... In other words, you have to be in that constant balancing.
That's what... This one's totally against that.
Yeah.
This one's saying you got to be one side of the fence.
You can't be on both sides of the fence.
And...
And the Nepantla, I think the way that they're explaining it is not in that same context of one side or the next side for balance.
I think that Nepantla story is more focusing on that in life, there is, the gringo word is, or let me see, the Mexican word,
is that there's always change, there's always cambio going on.
And in order for you to effectively deal with cambio, with change, you have to be ready for, what's the word?
There's a word, but I can't think of it right now.
But what it means is that you view change as something positive.
You don't view it as something of balance, but rather it's about the skill of being able to be responsive to change.
Not balance, but
responsive so well i mean so maybe you could connect it to the the two legs and the boat story in the sense that because in in picking a side you are you're choosing right you're choosing to
to to be more stable right given whichever way or how the river is flowing right um so instead of uh you know sticking with oh no i'm gonna keep my two feet in here no i'm gonna get rid of that one because this one and if it goes this way it's a little more stable and i can deal with that right now and then it might be that later you know you have to give up that little boat and jump on a log because the boat broke or whatever right
But trying to... So maybe in that sense, like the equilibrium kind of comes back in.
It's not about equilibrium.
It's about... It's about being true.
It's about being true.
You can't... Well, why can't equilibrium be a part of being true?
Because equilibrium has nothing to do with truth.
Equilibrium has to do with balance.
And...
What being true is about is about being authentic.
It's about being authentic.
It's about sureness, not, you know, I have a choice.
Yeah.
There is no choice.
It's only one way.
You got to be true.
That's why people who lie, that's why Native people don't lie.
But you can choose to be untrue.
Right?
That's what you're saying.
Those people who take that path towards vendidos.
They know what the truth is.
They choose to do that.
They can come up with whatever theory or explanation to justify it.
Maybe it's a commitment to truth or something like that.
um well this is really fascinating but and this is the other thing chinganismo to me has evolved to be the thing about about being um that you can't you cannot choose to be dishonest you got to be honest that's the only thing that's pure
Oh, so you're saying that's kind of like a principle of Chicanismo.
Yeah.
Yes.
Let me see.
There was one more question I'm going to ask, and then we can go.
Do you think that there is... Like, I liked all this kind of like, oh, I'm suspicious of mestizaje, that it gives you this excuse or past to be vendido.
Yeah.
Do you think it's possible for something where there is an authentic mestizaje?
In the way that you were kind of talking about that.
Do I think that there is a way to have authentic mestizaje?
Or do you think that like, so here's what I'm kind of getting at.
So in some mestizaje discourse, right?
Like they always refer to there's mestizaje from above where you have people like Vasconcelos, right?
Or some other kind of like Mexican intellectuals that say, or you can even say like from the Catholic church, right?
Mm-hmm.
Uh, you are two things.
Uh, you're a combination of these two things.
Right.
And there you go.
People have at it.
Right.
But is there, do you think that there is some kind of like messy sahih from below where it is like instantiated or, or made?
made authentic because it's coming from the people and not coming from like institutions of of academia or the government or the church and i think maybe what i'm thinking of is like you know like raskwachi something like that but i don't know what do you think raskwachi no because raskwachi raskwachi
Squatchiness is a technique.
It's a learned technique.
And it's at its best, I would say that it is a...
But there's a genuine wisdom associated with Tosquatchitas.
It's a, what do they call?
It's an aesthetic.
It's an aesthetic quality.
You can't BS Tosquatchitas.
People try.
Yeah, well, it's clear to people that it isn't.
Yeah.
But it has to do with being able.
It's like, you know how gringo society always, when they look at the native qualities and they have these perceptions of, oh, well, a native is like able to read nature.
They can see tracks.
The noble savage type of... Well, that's what they call it.
But what I'm saying is that they identify within Native people that they have a quality that allows them to be able to be quiet, walk through the forest, read the forest.
All of those skills...
are rasquatchiness skills, is what I'm saying.
A person who lives like that goes through life acting that out.
Like your tío, he's out there working on the nopales or whatever the hell he's doing.
He's got a lot of rasquatchy skills that he learned as a kid working with his grandfather out in the mountains with no tools, with no this, no that.
And it's just innate.
Is that the word?
It's in him because it's, it's, it's, that's what it is.
And so.
But the Trasquatchee that you're talking about is like kind of like making, making use of something that it's like not intended for.
Is that kind of what you do?
Well, that's what, what.
Academics say, but no, what I said is just what I just explained to you.
It's an innate skill that you learned by being able to engage anything in the real world or the natural world.
And adapt or something like that.
And use it.
Okay?
What was I watching the other day?
I don't know.
Oh, you know how they have those videos where they show
these islanders, and they're like, they gather one little stick, and they end up making a pool.
You know what I'm talking about?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's like that.
That's rasquatchy skill.
You know, you can't, you could probably teach that in the academic world, but this guy just doesn't.
They use their environment,
And it functions.
Functionality.
Genuine.
And Mexicans have that skill.
They just have it.
That's why when you hear George Lopez making his comedy, he says, oh, man, if they build a wall, we'll figure out how to use it for something positive.
It is true.
You know?
But so would you... Oh, so they showed...
this one video they were showing this family who had all this nice barbed wire on their property.
They took it off.
They took it off the wall?
Off the wall.
Oh, I see.
It's like, it's serving no purpose here, let's put it over here.
Yeah.
Well, so would you, would you consider that to be something different than Miss Isaheus?
I think mestizaje is propagated or promotion is from the church because they want to continue.
I mean, they had a political battle with Spain, with the government, with the monarchy, because they wanted the native people
to be their slaves in their missions and churches so they could use them and exploit them.
Whereas the Español was like, shit, let's get rid of them.
You know, all their good is for... Their land?
Yeah, for their land, their gold, their silver, and their labor.
The churches wanted them for their labor, but they also wanted them inside the church because they saw that.
Plus, that's how they kept all their priests fat, you know, and sexually content or whatever the hell.
So it was in the church's best interest, also politically, that what was happening right at that moment in history when the Españoles came to Mexico, that Martin Luther had left the church and started the Protestant movement in Germany.
Yeah.
So they lost half of their Catholics, and they gained Catholics by enslaving the native.
Well, I think that's all I have to ask.
Is there anything you want to finish up with?
Yes.
Turn it off for a second.
Let me find it.
Are you going to play a song?
No, I have a thing.
Led to believe by Luis Valdez of El Teatro Campesino that we were the Chicano Cultural Liberation Front of the Chicano Movement.
That our role of, are you recording?
Yeah.
That our role of resistance and rebellion was through the use of our cultural voice and activism.
Through teatro, our cultural history is a weapon against the
Anglo growers, white institutions, the Catholic Church, the war in Vietnam, white colonial oppression, etc.
We were a Chicano propaganda arm of the Chicano movement.
I was engaged in this cultural organization for seven years from 1969 to 1976 as a Chicano cultural activist, as an activist committed to our Chicano movement, La Causa.
Our mutual ideals united us to do this as an independent band of individuals, rebels with no pay or tribute to create a way of life through self-reliance, Chicano self-determination to become, to build a Centro Capesino Cultural de Aslan, a Chicano propaganda production center that would be a hub for reaching Chicanos and la raza throughout the U.S.
and Mexico.
I am a descendant of the native people of this continent.
Descendant from the native people of Aslan, whose ancestral lands are continental in scope.
I no longer recognize the term America as a true name of these lands or continents.
whose European occupiers landed in 1492, a mere 526 years ago.
I no longer accept Christianity as my religious way of life.
I now understand that my religious and spiritual ways were destroyed by the Vatican and the Roman Catholic Church.
and all of its agents, Western European monarchs and Christian sects.
I no longer recognize Columbus as the discoverer of these lands and these continents.
I no longer accept the identity of Indian, which was forced on all native people of these lands and continent by colonial legacy of Christopher Columbus.
I choose to identify and call myself a Chicano
I live to restore within me my true sense of being that resides deep in the genetic memory makeup of my ancestral native people.
I live to honor and restore my ancestral people worldview.
I live to be a warrior for life in this cause.
I live to restore all that was stolen in the name of Western people's governments and religion.
I live to expose the lives and thievery of Western people and their descendants who benefit today from their evil actions.
For those who still say that was not them, not I,
I live to always speak truthfully and to seek justice for all Native people and their descendants.
I believe in Native people wisdom and their view of social justice for all people.
I live to honor and respect Mother Earth as our universal home that shelters and feeds all living organisms.
I understand that all life is precious and that we live only a short time on this earth.
that our primary responsibility is to leave this earth better than we found it for our grandchildren, to dismantling of the doctrine of discovery.
And I think that's where I stopped.
Anyway, it goes on and on.
All right.
Thank you.